ok so moving on what will do now in the deal_player function
is will just add that command that we saw in the
previous video to print all the local
variables just so we're 100% clear on which
variables are local to the deal_player
function so you can do
this right down here at the bottom will do
a print out....and that is going
to do just that print a list of all the
local variables so if we run the program
now and go back to our game that is
running click the player function and
you can see card_value which has a score
of 10 or value of ten and player_score
which also has a value of ten
they are he 2 only local variables in this
function so it can really be useful because any
confusion in your programs to use this
locals function to call just so you are aware
fully which variables are local ok and it
just bares repeating the rule again one
more time when you use the name of a
global variable inside a function Python
is going to use the global variable as
long as you don't assign a new value to
it as soon as you add code that tries to
change the value the variable itself
becomes local and shadows the global
variable with the same name so because
the function assigns the value in
this case 0 to players_score I'm talking
about the code on line 47 player_score
becomes local to the function and
because no values was assigned to player_ace
we've only used the value we haven't
actually stored anything in there it's still
refers to the global variable that also
means that you can have a function that
happily using a global variable but will
suddenly switched to being local if you
happen to add code to change the value
of the variable and that can be really really
a gotcha their that will start potentially unpredictable
things or giving you unpredictable results
in your program now the
deal_player function provides a
good way to see this in action because
should actually change the value of
player_ace and looking at the code on
line 50 the card values is set to 11 if
this is the first ace dealt so if that
is the case then what we really should
be doing is setting player_ace the
variable player_ace to true so that
we know that there is a ace with a
value 11
so similarly you should also set to false when
we subtract 10 from score on line 54 so
if you go ahead and add it to line 50 so up here
and we put....
now immediately we gonna get an error well
two things happen when we did that
there's an error on now on line 49
and also IntelliJ is now warning  about player_ace
shadowing the global variable
of the same name so the errors is unresolved
reference player_ace and this can
be confusing probably thinking well hang on
player_ace tim you've just told me
that that's a global variable why isn't that
working well again because we've assigned a value
assigned a value now on line 50 what's
actually happened is its now being
converted into a variable a local variable
for this method and on line 49 when we're
doing a test for the value it hasn't
been initialize it hasn't been created as
such and it doesn't exist so that's
its coming and saying unresolved
reference to player_ace and
the other era in terms of the shadowing
name well we talk about that extensively we
know why that's coming up and that's
just because we're using the same
variable name of the variable in the
global variable as we are in this case
in the local variable so deal_player wasn't working
function but as soon as perfectly valid
assignment on line 50 was actually added
then we started getting an error now before you actually gone
through this video this type of error would
probably have driven you nuts now though
you can see why the IntelliJ
warnings are coming up and immediately know
what's going on so in a while what I'm
gonna do is rewrite the function so that
it doesn't try to make use of global
variables ideally a function should be
self-contained and not make changes to
anything outside itself now when a
function does change things like
global variables the changes are know as side
effects and it should really be avoided
wherever possible but with that said sometimes
side effects
are necessary so they are allowed but
aren't discouraged Python
automatically changing a global variable
to local when you try to change when you
try to change it is Python's way of
discouraging us from doing that because
they are occasionally necessary Python does
provide a way to make changes to global
variables within a function because of course
this is what the problem is here we
actually on line 50 when it change the value
of a global variable and it's not
allowing us to do that because as soon
as we've type in the same name and type in
an assignment to save a value to that variable it's created a
local variable and then consequently in
this case we got an error saying that
as of line 49 that variable didn't exist so how
do we go about changing a global
variable well the way to do that is to
specify that your intent on using global
variable by using the global keyword but
before doing that let's get rid of the
error on this line that sets player score to 0 every time the function is
called because that shouldn't be there this
is the code on line 467 because we really do want to use the
the score actually saved globally so
let's go ahead and delete that and as soon
as we have done that you can see now their are other errors on line 51 53 54 55 and 56 their is now errors
relating to player_score so
before I hover over and show you what the
error is and taking into account what
I've said in the video the mini challenge
for you is to answer this question and it's
why is now their an error when players_score
is being accessed and the hint
here is that we've talked about this
player_ace so have a think about that pause
the video and try and figure out why
we're getting an error with player_score now and when we come back i'll go through that with you
ok hopefully that made sense in terms of why that error
came up and what it is it's really the
same reason that player_ace returned an error and of course I talked about
that earlier in this video so by
removing the assignment that I did when I
deleted line 47 player_score now
doesn't have a value as far as
this functions concerned and this is just
primarily because we're trying to save
a value into player_score so as of the code on line 51 player_score
doesn't exist as a variable
because of the shadowing functionality
that Python does that the local variable
variable hasn't been initialized and
that's why we are getting those errors again
similarly to what was happening with
player_ace and specifically the
augmented assignment like we're seeing
on line 51 requires that the variable
already has a value and of course because
of the shadowing technique Python knows that
we're using a variable of the same
name and it's trying to create it would normally create a local variable but we
haven't actually done that we haven't
initialized that variable at this point
in time because their assignments
player_score is still a local variable
but of course we just deleted the line
that gave it a value ok so enough talks so how in
other words do we get the function in
this case to use the global variables of
the same name well to tell Python we want to used the
global variables we just use the global
keyword at the start of the function so
we came up here and on line 47 I'm gonna add
global.....and what that immediately
tells the function to use is to use the
global versions of those variables and
not trying to create a local
variable of the same name and consequently
all the errors  disappear at that point in
time and also the
the errors about shadowing or the warnings about
shadowing have also disappeared as well
because in fact we're not shadowing
anymore because the global keyword essentially is really as I said
telling the function to use the global
variables from this point forward in
that function so now if we run the
program again and actually I need to make another
change so just close it down
before we do that because we needed to make the
change here to add player_ace =
false
so when we are deducting 10 from the ace if you
recall we need to actually say....
.....so basically if the
card value is 1 in other words an ace and they haven't already
got an ace then we're going to assign
the player_ace variable which now global to
true but in the case of where there was
an ace their was an ace being treated as a
value of 11 and we've detected 10 from
it then for all intent and purposes we haven't got
that ace any more we are setting it back to false so now we should be able to run this and now when we run it
we click on player a value of ten their value of
twenty and one more and we get the
right message correctly coming up now
saying dealer wins so it's obviously
working out clearly it's using the
global scope and just make sure this is
working and it's random running game again
their is an ace 11 oh we got 21 we got blackjack now obviously
we haven't got a calculation in here to
check for blackjack we actually only
doing the score here score check if the
player scores greater than 21
we are not basically figuring out whether the
players won yet and we should bust
and if we click on one now it is clearly it's just
drawing random cards so its all working nicely
so what we've determined now is that Python
does allow
global variables to be modified inside a
function because of course that was the
problem we're always been able to get
access to global variables but we're
talking specifically about changing
those variables changing the values to
do that in a function you need to use
the global keyword that I've
shown you how to use on line 47 through 48
so the functions now working as we saw
when we ran the game but if this functions
modifying the two global variables player_score
and player_ace how can we will be
sure that some other function isn't also
changing them and its quite possible when a game in that could happen and if something else
does change them then the deal_plater function is no longer going to work
correctly because it really is assuming
that it's got full control over those
variables or the way that the code has been
written and this is the main reason why
side effects are discouraged and why functions really should only be modified
varaibles in the outer scope i.e. globally if
there's really no other way to perform
the functionality that are you creating
and usually there is actually way
around so before we write in the function
to remove the side effects it is actually
worth revisiting the design so the deal_player gets a new card and
maintains a total by adding the value of
that card to its tally and that
tallies now stored in player_score as a global variable
and we are gonna have to do the same thing for
the dealers so it may make sense to
create a function that returns a score if
it's given a list of cards so what we
gonna do is we are going to add a score _hand function and its purpose is
to do that it to look at a hand and
calculate a score based on that hand so
we are gonna create that under deal_cards
so down here we are gonna call it...
....
.....
....because when we first
starting we haven't got any cards so obviously
we haven't got an ace and lets go through all the cards so....
....
......
.....
....
.....and that's basically the method that's the
loop that goes through each hand then when we finish we return the
score so given a list
containing tuples wether the first item
in the tuple is the value that function is going
add up all the values and return the score
and as I mention the first ace will have the value 11
rather than 1 and if the total score goes above
21 and there is at least one ace then
the total has decreased by 10 and
hopefully the player won't have busted but in
any case we are going to return the score so that is
pretty much the same as what we're doing
when dealing the card and it now goes through
the entire hand rather than the single
card at a time so now that we've done
that we can actually implement this
in deal_player and before calling
it the card just dealt is added to the
list that contains the player's hands so going back to deal_player
obviously our designed has changed
dramatically so what we gonna do here is
we are going to delete all this function well what I'll do I'll just comment it
out so you still got access to that if you
want to but it's now a lot easier so....
....
...and that should
be it so basically what we're doing now
is what we've done is we've
rewritten the deal_player function to put all that logic call
the logic that we've just created
in the score_hand and we are still getting
this warning about shadowing but we no
longer need these global variables
anymore so we are gonna delete player score = 0 and player ace = false so gonna go down and delete these
now so player_score = 0 and player_ace = false so delete those
now because we no longer need those and the video is getting a little bit long so I'm gonna stop
this video here and in the next video when
we come back we're going to look at the
deal_dealer function because
that is now very very similar to the deal_player
but obviously need to do a
test to see whether the player wins and etc
so I'll see you in the next video